for the bodhicattva aspirating to the
wealth of virtue. Every harm is like a
precious tasure.
Thus without resentment toward any being
cultivating patience is the practice of
bodhic sappa.
Uh this verse expresses a key principle
of patience.
Sanskrit
uh patience
paramea which is one of the six parameas
in Mahayana Buddhism.
So again body suffers want to develop
uh this paramea
patience to benefit themselves and all
other beings.
For bodhic sattas
actively involved
and practicing
um
each and every time. Sometime
something um
goes wrong. It becomes an opportunity
for the cultivation of patience
rather than viewing an obstacle
as a basis for resentment.
So important right here it says every
harm is like precious tasia
not all bodhicat not me
for bodhic sattas difficulties are not
seen as obstacles but as opportunity to
cultivate patience
every harm is like precious tasure
You see um the natural
human
response to harm is anger
>> or resentment, right?
But bodhic surface
um seek to
transcend
this and for them it's like a precious
tasure.
So if we wish to achieve benefiting
ourselves and others, it is absolutely
essential that uh we cultivate patience
because patience allows us to remain
stable and check in responding with uh
understanding
rather than hatred.
Instead of blaming others,
bodhic sattas see the deeper
causes of suffering.
So practice and patience
um and the in the face of harm is the
transformation of suffering into
spiritual growth.
So this practice
not only benefit ourselves by reducing
suffering but also benefit others by
bringing
peace.
So to practice patience, you first have
to
to start practicing with yourself
and then for example,
with your parents
and then with your friends and so on.
The first thing you have to do is
I think not to speak but remain quiet,
not arguing back and not reacting sort
of negatively.
Teachers say
this is what you you have to do when you
get upset.
For example,
someone hurts you
and because of that if you get upset
in this way
you kind of injure your heart of
bodhicitta
and as a result the heart of bodhicitta
is damaged.
So your goal is
until you achieve liberation,
you must keep your heart of bodhicitta
with you at all times,
no matter what situation you are in.
So you have to treat all
um enemies
remember which is the anger
that harms you as your treasure
then your bodhic chhatta will grow
stronger and stronger.
So,
but usually we we don't really know
how strongly we practice the dharma.
Sometimes we feel we are okay
but actually we're not because
when someone hurts us we get upset
there's no patience.
So bodhic sattvas say whenever u
crucial time comes
you should use that moment as an
opportunity to practice
dharma patience.
Good practitioners
should be able to deal with um whatever
obstacles arise.
Anger and patience are like
good opportunity to practice patience
when anger arise in your mind. You know
anger and patience are like fire and
water, right?
If you are angry,
you're not being patient.
If you are not being patient, then
you're not behaving like a bodhic
sattva.
We
I mean clearly we can't practice
patience with people who are nice and
kind.
We need people who are not nice.
Then we have a chance to practice
patience, forgiveness.
That is why it says every harm is like a
precious tasia.
From the Mayan perspective, those who
harm you
offer the same opportunity
for spiritual growth as those who help
you.
But this is um
this is the opposite of how we ordinary
beings think, right?
teachers say when Adisha came to Tibet,
he bought a person with him
and this person was very
um
disagreeable
um argumentative
you know and Tibetan people complained
about him, you know,
and actually asked Adisha, you should
let him go back.
But Adisha explained that this person
was very important for his practice of
patience.
But you should know that patience
doesn't mean
letting someone do whatever they want.
If if if someone is harming others,
you should try to stop them.
But you do so without being angry at
them
because you know anger again destroys
the the the the the virtue of patience.
So anger will destroy
um your relationships and so on
and
impatient people are always
frustrated, upset, unhappy with
everything.
Shanda said harmful beings are
everywhere like space. So it is
impossible to control all of them.
Did I say this morning this but but let
this anger mind alone be overcome then
all of those are also controlled.
So that's uh four fourth parameter. Now
the next is
Merely for their own sake even
make efforts as if putting out a fire on
their hand heads
developing
even more diligence the source of good
qualities for the sake of all sake
of all beings is the practice of bodhic
sattva.
This verse uh deals with the the the the
perfection of um diligence. Right?
The main point of this verse is that
bodhic sattas need
um tremendous diligence in their
practice
because the path of bodhic sappa is
long, deep, challenging.
because
it's motivated not just by personal
liberation but for all beings that's a
deep commitment.
So in this verse it mentions
shvakas and bartikas
they follow the path of personal
liberation.
Hayana.
So they have a lesser motivation
of only trying to free themselves from s
from samsara.
Even with this
they still need to practice diligently.
It says here you know like fire burns on
on their head. fire burns on your head,
you would not waste any time, right? You
would act immediately to put out the
fire on your head.
Then how much more must do you practice
on the path of bodhic satta? It's deep.
It's challenging. It's long
as well as religion practice the
paramuda.
Because when you engage
uh in the bodhic sarapath
uh you have the great intention of
liberating yourself as well as all other
beings. So therefore you need even more
practice of um diligence.
So here a fire on the head
symbolizes the urgency of dharma
practice.
Otherwise
you will suffer like fire makes you
suffer.
Um
Shandanda
also gives an example. It's like when
you have a poisonous snake in your lab,
you immediately jump into action because
it will kill you.
So you should act like this with your
dharma practice.
So Mahayana
bodhicatta path involves a vast
intention and profound practice. That's
why it says to develop even more
diligence, the source of good qualities
for the sake of all beings.
Since bodhic sattvas carry the
responsibility
of guiding all beings
um their diligence must be even greater
than those who seek only personal
liberation like hayana
teachers say when you see the benefit of
happiness through your through your
practices
then Your diligent naturally comes.
We usually think diligence diligence
means
kind of forcing ourselves to do
something right. That's wrong. But here
it means
joyous effort. Diligence means joyous
effort. Joyous effort means having a a
happy relaxed mind.
So practicing the dharma develops
appreciation
and an understanding of the preciousness
of life.
That then inspires self-confidence
and an understanding of basic potential.
All your wisdom,
patience and bodhicitta grow from
diligence effort.
So diligence is like the domino effect
and bring many beneficial things
not forcing yourself something that you
really don't want to do it.
That's not diligence.
So in daily life
diligence can mean
acting selflessly,
overcoming laziness
and engaging wholeheartedly
and compassionate activities.
something you really understand
deeply and deeper level, diligence will
automatically come cuz you really want
you just you're just so happy with it.
And then
but we don't have enough diligence.
But that's okay. just keep going
as long as you don't give up.
So diligence is the most important in
Buddhism Mahayan especially Buddhism
without um diligence we there is no no
way to achieve enlightenment in this
lifetime but that's totally fine that's
totally fine as I I said this so many
times as long as you practice bodhic
jetta
and investigate your actions, make sure
they're positive, then don't worry about
um achieving enlightenment in this very
lifetime.
You know, one thing is Buddhism is I I
just recognize that you know these days
younger generations they lots of people
they don't have a goal
you know sometimes achieve that okay I I
want I get married I have children I
make a lot of money everything but still
they feel like dissatisfaction
dissatisfied whatever they have and then
they kind of lose their what what is the
point right there's no goal but good
thing is in Buddhism there's this goal
what is your goal achieve enlightenment
that
normal like worldly people don't have
this kind of goal this is I think in
Buddhism is very special is achieve the
enlightenment as your long-term goal if
you have enough diligence
It's possible
you achieve enlightenment in this very
lifetime. But if you don't have that
kind of diligence then
you know practice bodhic all this and
then you know eventually so you have a
goal so you just don't think oh this
life is pointless. What is the point?
The point is achieve enlightenment for
the sake of other sentient beings.
So that's good, right?
Okay. Good. And the 29th verse is
understanding that disturbing emotions
are destroyed by special insight with
calm Biden.
Cultivating meditative stability that
transcends the four formlessly states is
the practice of bodhic sattvas.
So this paramei
meditative concentration. So usually our
minds are not really focused on
meditation. We are constantly distracted
by
um non-stop thoughts.
and disturbing emotions. So we need this
this um
you know these two methods you know
which is um special insight
with Ku Biden. special insight is we
call some uh what do we call um vapasha
right the wisdom that realizes emptiness
and com
um calms the mind
and provides the clarity
necessary for insight to arise.
So vapasha
can only arise within
uh stable shamada practice
and
the combination of these two great
methods can eliminate disturbing
emotions. So it says to cultivate
meditative stability that transcends the
four
formlessly states
See the four four from states are
very very deep concentration
and advanced
meditative stage in Buddhism.
So the first first state is called
infinite space. Okay. In this state,
meditators
experience
onepointness of mind.
The second state is called infinite
consciousness.
And this state they focus on inner
stillness and deeper concentration
without thoughts.
They experience only joy and happiness
in this state.
Then the third state is called
nothingness.
In this state they focus on the mind and
settle into a state where it experience
nothing.
And the fourth state is called neither
perception nor nonperception.
So in this state they focus on
supreme equinimity
and mindfulness.
So the mind is neither fully perceiving
nor completely absent of per perception.
So in in early Buddhist meditation
this is the highest meditative observion
undisturbed
stillness.
It's an externally subtle
meditative state.
But on the bodhic sattva path mahayana
meditation is not pursued just for the
sake of experience in these uh kind of
formless states
but it's u ultimately
integrated with wisdom
with wisdom. Wisdom brings
enlightenment.
That's why bodhic servas need to go
beyond these four state.
Even though they are very deep uh level
of samadi
but they are still within samsara. So
therefore bodhic sattvas integrate
wisdom.
Sometimes they call special insight
right wisdom. this kind of wisdom,
special insight
and make sure that meditation is not
just about um calm stillness but also
about ultimate realization with wisdom
and just deep meditation alone will not
diminish
um all these uh emotions afflictions. So
you must uh unite it with wisdom
awareness that relies emptiness and
clarity.
And uh
awareness is an inner wisdom that gives
you the ability to see things more
clearly.
And with uh concentration
you are able to stay perfectly focused
for as long as you want and your mind
will be able to
rest,
right? And you experience the clarity of
mind that comes when
it's free from distractions.
Now with concentration you can create
longer times of awareness so that you
can bring your meditation into daily
life.
Um in the beginning
of spiritual practice the most important
thing is is is to work with the mind.
And the best way to work with the mind
is through concentration and wisdom.
So through through for example shamata
meditation
uh you will be able to develop
concentration right and relaxation
and through vipasha meditation you'll be
able to cultivate recognition of ultim
ultimate awareness and clarity
which is the best qualities of the mind
itself.
A bodhis ha
manifest
from profound emptiness inseparable from
great compassion.
So this it says you know you have to go
beyond
>> this four formlessly state. Remember I
told you right Buddhakimi reached this
this level and he did not
satisfy it because he's he understood oh
I'm still I have this still subtle this
emotions I'm still that means I'm in I'm
not
um
achieve enlightenment I'm still in
samsara
I hope you will be able to one day you
can read this sutra is so beautiful. um
the Buddha's journey
when you read their kind of sutas you
just don't care everything you want you
want just go
and you know
leave everything there
follow the Buddha it's beautiful but
then it comes down when you do it it's
difficult
[Music]
Okay, that's uh
parami.
Now the next the 30
is
it says practicing the five perfections
without wisdom cannot attain perfect
enlightenment.
Thus with skillful means and free from
the three concepts cultivating wisdom is
the practice of bodhic sattas.
So here it says practicing the five
perfections without wisdom cannot attain
perfect enlightenment. Right? It means
until we accomplish this wisdom
paramuda,
it's impossible
to achieve full enlightenment.
It's because without wisdom, there's no
recognition of the true nature of
reality.
Shan Dewa also says in the in the his in
the wisdom chapter
says the Buddha taught this entire
system of the five paramudas for the
purpose of wisdom.
Therefore
the wisdom paramata is essential for
properly putting into practice the other
five paramatas.
Right? So without wisdom for example we
don't know how to practice generosity
without wisdom we don't know how to
practice discipline
or always without wisdom we always make
mistakes
so with a lack of wisdom we will be
practicing the other paramatas kind of
blindly right
we're not sure about
what we are believing in
what we are aiming for and how to
achieve it.
So Buddha said when lacking lack in
knowledge the other five paramatas will
be blind.
Buddha Shakimi focused on wisdom
and he thinks this is the very important
because that's why Buddha bu in Buddhism
we that I mean the faith devotion is the
foundation of your your practice but
without wisdom then our faith and
devotion is blind.
So therefore we must to cultivate this
wisdom if we wish to develop um the
action bodhicitta without any uh
mistakes.
Do you remember Buddha said after um six
years of uh his practices
he said I have discovered a nectar like
wisdom realization
that is infinite profound and peaceful
that's that's what we call enlightenment
so wisdom is not just only having a lot
of knowledge
or being smart. But wisdom is associated
with the ability to live a meaningful
life.
So think about uh the definition of
bodhicitta.
There are two things. Focus on sentient
beings
with compassion.
Then focus on
Perfect enlightenment with wisdom.
That's the definition of bodhicitta.
So there is a compassion, there is a
wisdom.
So if either of these is missing, it
will not be genuine bodhicitta.
So in Buddhism, wisdom and compassion
must develop together.
which is what we call bodhicetta.
And then it says skillful means and free
from the three concept. To understand
three concept,
a bodhic sattva
must cultivate both skillful means and
wisdom.
skillful means are the
methods they use when they are
practicing the five parameters.
Skillful means
refers to compassionate action
and wisdom make sure those actions are
not based on attachment or anger or
ignorance.
Right?
That's skillful means free from the
three concepts. Ski skillful means.
Right? And then the free from the three
concepts. It says here it means for
example
the first for example generosity paramea
for example with with a given right
first the emptiness of the giver
the one who performs the action.
And then second, the emptiness of the
receiver,
the one who benefits. Right? Then the
third, the emptiness of the actor of
giving,
the actor of itself, act itself.
So bodhic sattas need to constantly hold
the the view of emptiness of the the
three these three concept.
They can do this practice with the
realization of great wisdom
that's free from the three concept.
So after developing um a foundation of
shamata meditation you can build um the
special insight
free of this this concept.
When a bodhic sattva acts with
compassion and with wisdom, their action
become truly selfless, right? Selfless
and truly pure. So this union of wisdom
and compassion leads to perfect
liberation.
So the main practice of bodhic satta is
wisdom and compassion through these six
paramatas.
So generosity, discipline, patience all
with wisdom, compassion
then that is how to practice action
bodhicitta.
Okay,
that's the last
uh
paramata. So this is this the the
summary of the the six paramatas
generous. These are important. If you
practice bodhic chitta this is action
bodhicitta.
But in order to practice action
bodhicitta first you have to practice in
um what do you call it?
Aspiration bodhicitta right?
But you need both relative bodhicitta.
So the the six parameas for example
generosity is um generosity paramuta is
the willingness to give others whatever
is needed. It helps to overcome
attachment.
Discipline
is avoiding all of the problems that
arise from acting, speaking and thinking
harmfully. It helps overcome negative
behavior, develop self-control.
Patience baramuda is the ability to
endure difficulties without getting
angry. It helps to keep calm in the face
of difficulties.
Then diligence
is courageous action,
joyful action. It helps to overcome
feeling of laziness and stops
us from giving up.
Then then fifth meditative concentration
um is a state of mind totally free from
mental wandering.
It helps to stay focused with
relaxation.
And then of course the last wisdom
paramuda is is the state of mind that
understands
what is correct what is incorrect.
So it helps to overcome ignorance and
confusion.
That's all
six parameters. That's how you practice
six parameas. In order to six paramas
in practice six paramedas you need again
compassion and wisdom.
That's all.
Thank you very much. Practice experas.